so i i've i've always been very interested in um the the history of the venetian republic
um like i don't know for some reason it's just very interesting to me and recently i've gotten
like this interest in futarchy which some of you may be aware of some of you may not uh so i guess
we'll go over um what futarchy is and how it works but maybe first starts with some venetian
history uh oh but actually let's start with this so um yeah like the you know the general way we
think of like governance in critical nationalism is just really um you know pauper is about like
removing bad rulers without violence uh dojic extended this uh to um error correction um
and it's really the error correction i'm interested here uh in this talk
so
the way uh venice worked if you don't know is they had uh these like initially monarchs who
then became representatives who then became sort of like symbolic figures called the doge so this
is my example and then the the issue they had uh throughout their uh thousand hundred year
existence uh because you know venice started like in 697 lasted until 1797 is um
initially at least is that
these rulers tried to always um get one of their descendants to become the next ruler um
and so that was very bad for venice because the merchant class so the um uh you know the
venice was really like this commercial city uh with a lot of trade happening and a lot of you
know slave trade as well um and so and they needed stability right like you know coups
um you know these like weird success succession things it's just really bad for business and it's
it's really bad for the business um and so they really were optimizing for stability um and and
that's really like the pattern you see in the evolution of venice so if you look at those these
are like five events that i've like handpicked but there are like way more in the history of venice
so the concho was like the popular assembly and so in 1032 so this is already like 300 years
three four hundred years after venice started it's not there's no official start date but like
we said it started then um they banned hereditary uh
succession for the rulers and then in 1172 what they do is they add the minor council which is
sort of like this body of people who are sort of like a check and balance on the doge they can like
veto proposals and stuff and then in 1192 they start this uh which to me is like this hilarious
thing where they essentially get the doge to sign a contract and when the uh you know when you become
a doge you have to
um sign this contract which says oh you can't do this you can't do this you can't steal money you
can't do all these things and then in 1299 1229 they they realize well actually the contract which
was initially 12 pages is is really not long enough like we really need to have more clauses
in there because like the dojos are all like acting like crazy um so we're now going to set
up this commission that is like this error correction commission um that is after the
life of each doge going to um uh going to review the life of the doge and go through each and
everything the doge did and um review everything they did and then like add clauses to the
contract that the next doge is going to sign so that this doesn't happen again and so in the end
you reach a contract of 300 pages by 1797 and the doge cannot do anything anymore and you become
sort of like a symbolic figure
over time because um there are like so many constraints and so many rules that he's basically
no longer an actual ruler um and so the the error correction kind of worked because like the doge
is no longer making those errors but like he's just no longer doing anything at all um and then
yeah i just added like the 10 round election thing because that's really interesting so this is like
sort of like tangential but uh so the way they elected those uh rulers was through like this 10
round process where so let's say you um
you select 50 people uh then you get those 50 people to elect 20 people then of those 10 20
people you do a lottery and you get maybe like 10 people out of this then those 10 people elect
maybe 40 people whatever uh those 40 people you do a lottery again you get like 10 people again
you get those two people to elect people again and you just like many many many times and then
at the end you get like a pool of people who are like sort of like randomly selected but there's
still like a selection going on because they're still like each time electing but there's no way
it's because you don't know who's actually going to be electing the doge in the end anyway this is
sort of like tangential but it's really interesting to me okay so um the the things venice did well
so we have uh treating governance as an open problem because you need to be iterating on this
and as you saw like they've been iterating on this for like a thousand hundred years like they
were constantly like trying to figure out solutions um they are or you know power distribution across
overlapping bodies uh which you know as we do now in our traditional democracies um so they made
a lot of effort to figure out how to deal with this problem um and so they made a lot of effort to
figure out how to deal with this problem um and so they made a lot of effort to figure out how to
deal with this problem um and so they made a lot of effort to figure out how to deal with this problem
afterwards um and so even if you acted wrongly as doge but you died you would still face
repercussions of your of your actions um and then what they didn't do well there comes is what we
call the sarada which is basically the entrenchment of the uh aristocracy so the uh so they knew that
they couldn't get the doge to act correctly uh so sorry sorry so they knew that the doge couldn't
um be hereditary uh anymore um so what they did is that they just made the voter base hereditary
um you know logical solution uh all problems are soluble so um instead so they had this great
council and they made it made it so that only the descendants of the existing members of the
great council could join the great council and it's kind of like symbolic by this phrase that
when a new doge was elected they would say oh this is a new doge if it pleases you uh and then
like in 1423 when they abolished the popular assembly they just said this is your doge like
no questions asked like just you know you will you will accept it um and so like the deeper point is
just that there was a correction as we saw but like there was entrenchment um and that
entrenchment is really problematic and the way you can avoid that entrenchment is through markets
um so uh that's basically like the gist of futarchy
so the way it was initially conceived is you do still have elections so you vote on your values
so for a company maybe it will be like the stock price uh for a country might be like the gdp life
expectancy whatever like you know maybe for spacex for example it's making life multi-planetary
um anyway and then you get markets to trade on those um uh to trade on the proposals to figure
out what the right proposal is so there are multiple ways of doing futarchy um
uh but before that uh so we know this actually really works well uh empirically uh so we know
like you may have seen the polymarket was better pricing uh the odds of elections than uh pollsters
are um or like in for like oranges futures like they're constantly able to like uh beat the
government and then the huge thing was when um so there was the space shuttle that like uh exploded
like decades ago and within 16 minutes the market was able to figure out who um the guilty supplier
was and the stock of that guilty supplier started crashing and not the other ones so and it took
four months for the commission that investigated this to actually figure out the same answer
so within 16 minutes the market knew it's this guy and uh we're selling their stock um and so
the the air correction mechanism here is really interesting because
if you're wrong you lose your money so you lose your ability to participate in the system
and the people who tend to be right for the rights you know ways of thinking about it who are really
like experts in the subject and we're actually experts in subjects because they're they're
betting on their beliefs so they're skin in the game uh they accumulate influence um and so how
does this actually work in practice so again there are many ways of doing futarchy uh this is just
one of those ways so let's say you have a proposal let's say uh spend uh some funds out of the treasury of the company
and then you have a conditional market vote where um it's either the proposal passes or the proposal
fails and then you're going to trade uh those assets so it could be a token from crypto but
um and then whichever token ends up the highest at the ends um is the one that actually gets
implemented and then you can um you know you can do like uh the twop is like time weighted average
price so you can do like a rolling window where you take the average
price of that window so that you avoid like market manipulation because otherwise you could have
like a rich person just buy up the token at the very end to like manipulate the odds you can do
all these things um but that's kind of like the gist of it um and then like the traditional like
objection to that is that future key is like ruled by the rich uh because if you're rich you have a
lot of money so you can actually influence the market um i mean in some ways it is sure um but
then most everything else is all the money that you can actually use to influence the market um
but then most everything else is all the money that you can actually use to influence the market um
most everything else also is and if you you know for a company for example for a company context
if you do token voting uh like share voting um that's also a plutocracy um and then
the different thing here is if you if you vote with your shares there's no consequence to that
so if you're wrong about your your your you know the way you voted like you're incorrect about your
assumptions um there's no consequence to that i mean the business might do less well but it might
get the business might get picked up by something else that will actually get it back up but there's
no consequence there's no cost to it directly uh and the cost is distributed if it actually goes
badly for the business afterwards because of you the cost is distributed across all shareholders
instead of just you um in this case it's just you if you um if you think a proposal is good but then
um the market doesn't price it as such uh you lose your money and it's over for you um and that's
the thing where it avoids entrenchments because let's say i'm a very rich person and i'm not a
so i have a lot of money and i uh my son i don't have a son but let's say i have a son my son um is
now the you know i pass away my son takes over and so he has a lot of money now but he you know
he's an idiot he like he doesn't you know um and he he loses uh so so he he bets wrongly he's going
to lose the money so there is it avoids the entrenchment problem that you see in venice
where it's just you know everyone always the same people who essentially make the rules
um and so yeah so then there's like short-termism and manipulation so you know markets are short
term uh again we you know we know that's no that's not actually true like you can have like
long-term investors um you know you can tweak the values you're optimizing for to avoid this
markets can be manipulated again this is something you can also avoid through like taking the average
or the price doing all these things um so and again like the market is the comparison is not
like i'm not saying this is perfect but i'm not saying this is perfect but i'm not saying this is
perfection right there's always like room for improvement or you know um beginning of infinity
you know uh but um it's to me it sounds like an improvement to like the traditional way we do
democracy um and it's not incompatible with democracy right like you can still have elections
where you appoint um a ruler or like you know a government um but then for example that government
will have to issue proposals that could then get like priced by the markets um so it's not
it's to me it sounds like a very interesting way of doing things um so yeah thank you so much for
your time and uh yeah very interesting talk i'm certainly going to read up on futaki is that how
futaki yeah yeah yeah i mean the future yeah right so apologies if i'm just slow today but like
how would this be implemented let's say by some
miracle yes united kingdom by some process can always dream you can dream uh it's futaki from
tomorrow yes what happens then what how does that work yeah yeah speaking i mean um legitimate
question or no no it is it definitely is i mean uh so i guess the way it would work is in my
conception again there are many ways of doing things but like my conception would be uh so we
still elect like a prime minister um who is sort of like those values you're optimizing for right
so you can
like him you know you feel like he has a right way of looking at things um he then issues the
proposals say for example let's spend um i don't know like um 10 10 million dollars to uh for the
defense budget i mean 10 million dollars is not much but whatever um and then the market will
price whether this will lead on a 10 year 20 year 30 year basis to a higher gdp for the country or
like whichever value you're optimizing for um and then if it actually does
which i'm assuming it would because you know we don't need to be defendant um then the proposal
gets implemented and then the executive body goes to action and actually implements it and then
yeah if it if it doesn't then the proposal doesn't pass and the guy knows well yeah the market
disagrees okay and who's participating in the market anyone with money basically anyone with
money and so over time you're going to get increasingly sophisticated actors like you
have in the stock markets where you have you know you've even like options derivative like these
hedge funds um and then you're going to get increasingly sophisticated actors like you have
and then like in prediction markets we're kind of like starting to see this like on polymark and
stuff we're going to we're starting to see like these increasingly sophisticated actors um like i
think there was like an article of like hedge fund where they actually send someone to hormuz
to like literally on like a speedboat to like investigate their like extract like information
on the field they come um so yeah they did come back they did come back so um yeah like they will
you know people will make it happen so yeah thank you
thanks hi great talk um i'm one of the people that's trying to make these decision markets
work in practice at a small scale go okay futaki and the trouble that classically we run into is
that if you try to run a company this way um oftentimes the ceo just doesn't like the result
over the yeah market and therefore um is uncomfortable and it never starts in the
first place there's been some attempts with with dow's i haven't looked up to you very much
um i was trying to make these decision markets work in practice at a small scale and i'm one of
i was trying to have a uh have the funding for projects be based on whether people bet whether
it would work yes and this actually ended up working probably less well than having just a
champion who says i want this to work and then people fund them yeah the decision market ends
up pulling in people later but then maybe sort of like the person who originally set up the voting
might have been more appropriate um do you have any ideas for how we can make it's hard to test
at the country scale yeah yeah yeah make some more prototypes of this yeah yeah so there's there's
there's a lot of work to be done but there's a lot of work to be done um and so the way they do it
is actually as you said so they just limit the decisions to funding essentially mostly like there
are a few other things but it's really just like budgets and so the the ceo they they will like
issue a proposal to um let's say oh we need like six months of runway to do this this this this
and then uh so in that proposal there are all the kpis all the things you need to you know be acting
you know the market will price that and the proposal passes or doesn't and it seems to be
working now it might also be a better fit for certain types of businesses and certain types
of organizations and not certain others like i don't know like it doesn't strike me like i don't
see like elon for example like constantly like oh like please please vote on proposal like please
price it correct like it's you know um but like you know like for example through metadata like
we've seen like some people like a single guy who doesn't have like a lot of money he can't like
invest traditional investors and so what he does is he uh creates uh an organizational metadata and
then he um raises like fifty thousand dollars for example to do like this new ai thing he's working
on and that's like really a great fit because there's like still this check and balance uh that
you wouldn't have with like traditional investing where it's like pretty hands-off for like these
early stage investors um and yet the person is still able to raise money from anywhere on earth
um so yeah thanks
uh great talk great talk um i'm still torn between futarki and token holder voting or
shareholder governance right uh you said there's no consequences to shareholders voting
there is but like it's less direct yeah okay um but you know if it's a well-established project
and um you know whales as you call them crypto have um a lot of money invested in the project
um like for them to be making these prediction markets of bets like they're gonna have to
either sell some of their token or share the shares to to vote on them so instead like why
don't you just do shareholder voting or token holder voting yeah so i guess the the traditional
um so i guess like true objections to that i would say um so like first my guess i don't actually
don't know but my guess is there is a reason why in the traditional way we do companies which has
existed for like you know um decades if not centuries now um we don't let the shareholders
like choose um you know there's a reason for that
because like the shareholders have their own incentives and they may they may either like
prioritize like short-term gains or like um they may prioritize like we've seen many times in
crypto actually uh to just essentially steal people's money by just taking over the project
and just that's for me um so that's that's the key problem it's you know uh and then there's also
like the entrenchment problem where um well the shoulder today may be good but then long term um
you may be their descendant or whatever um and if you're looking at that's like at a country level
um they may not be as good so then you know we get this entrenchment and the system doesn't like
filter those out with um with future key you are able to like constantly like get people who are
bad at this to lose money so you effectively effectively filter them out now regarding your
second question of let's say i have all my money in a particular stock i'm like very convinced by
it um yeah it's true it's a limitation like you would you would potentially be able to
potentially borrow funds um but then you would also say for example i own like ten ten thousand
dollars in a particular stock that's all i have um you could you could say well okay i'm going to
sell a bit and if i'm actually right on betting on the proposal i will get more money out of it
which means that i can buy more uh stock back it's kind of like it's not it's not ideal um but
there's still something to be done there um but i agree in the limited case where all your wealth is
in that specific uh stock or asset whatever it's it's not perfect yet there's there's probably a
solution which i haven't thought of maybe you could borrow against it but still not ideal
um so yeah that's a that's a limitation as far as i know yeah
um i've been living in switzerland for the last 20 years or so um i just wondered if you have any
thoughts on the difference between the kind of direct democracy that you're trying to practice
there versus this kind of more
maybe financially oriented or token oriented approach yeah yeah i mean direct democracy like
is very interesting i mean it's kind of like direct share voting in a way like you know um
i guess the the problem with dark democracy that people are not necessarily fully aware of all the
um you know the the constraints and all the implications of a particular proposal
um you know and then you know try doing like direct democracy at like the scale
of like the us for example like it's it's much harder i mean i think in in switzerland it's like
occasional through like referendums so it's like it's it's not like every time we're doing
dark democracy um but you could still you know have a mix of that with futarchy right like it's
not necessarily mutually exclusive in a way um so like on key things like for example moral issues
um i mean i'm not going to ask a market to price whether like you know slavery is good or bad right
like that's not a good idea
um so like on those moral issues like you know dark voting is probably you know still applicable
yeah i do i do wonder whether there's something in there about practice actually that that what
seems to be happening in switzerland is because they have so many referenda yeah they're actually
quite practiced at what the yeah yeah yeah so they get better at it yeah so we did one big one
and then said we never want another one yes yes yes we could have started a bit smaller yes yes
yes that's a good point
oh i think
uh
in the back
yeah um coming back to the moral point you made yeah uh markets might not price these moral points
fast enough yeah because like profits that come out of uh these immoral points might want to
last longer yes slavery is a good point so how would you think about that
i mean i guess that's like on the values where
like the mark the rule of the market is you're up like what you're trading for is how close you get
to those values that you you voted for so obviously if you if you voted for uh let's mistreat people
let's punch them in the face well then the market will you know favor like punching people in the
face but like if you if you optimize for life expectancy gdp um maybe some security or whatever
um it's really just bad for the markets to have a lot of value for the market and i think that's
it's really just bad for the markets to have um you know um you know mistreatment or whatever
because that's bad for like business right so um there are still cases where it's not ideal um like
i don't know how this would have played out with slavery for example it's going to be quite an
interesting question um but you can probably get around it with like optimizing for the right
values and then having just the market play dog yeah but certain values need to lost the test of
time right uh yes at least over i mean they're very simple right like i mean the examples i did
i put here was just like gdp life expectancy those are like very very very very very simple
things which i think most people will agree on i mean i don't know like i mean some people do
actually want to be poor but um you know most people you know in a world of abundance let's
assume like 30 years from now yes it wouldn't make sense to put metrics of gdp and you know
life expectancy because that would be the baseline right what what do you mean the value
of life expectancy and gdp because the gdp is like such a reductionist way of thinking the world
right now oh yeah of course world of abundance it would be very different metrics yeah yeah you
you would need to have them evolve like you can do like elections every now and then have like
through the dark democracy like vote on new values every now and then um you can have those systems i
don't think that's necessarily like a blocker or like a deal breaker um in this case yeah
uh yeah really nice talk
okay for someone completely new to these topics do you have any recommended like books or other
resources um i mean the work of robin hansen who is like kind of like the the founder of future key
um is is really interesting so i will look up his articles on it i will look into metadata so
they're like this project like in crypto they're doing it and it seems to be working well right now
um and then yeah for venetian history there are plenty of books um um there's like a maritime
plan lane which is really really good um so yeah that's what we recommend you know thanks
okay thank you